Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor William Chopik. He's associate
professor in the Department of Psychology at Michigan State
University. He's a social personality psychologist interested in how
relationships and the people in them change over time
and across situations. And today we're going to talk
about relationship science, dynamics between partners and health outcomes
associated with them, singlehood and marriage, and also attachment.
So Doctor Chopik, welcome to the, to the show.
It's a pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, pleasure as well. Nice to be here.
So let me ask you first, what is relationship
science? What kinds of topics and questions does it
explore?
Uh, SO I would define it as the scientific
study of social connection. Uh, SO, uh, it's such
a dangerous question, like, what does it study, what
doesn't it study, um, because it's so much, it's
between, you know, how you meet people for the
first time, why you're attracted to them, um, how
to form a relationship, how to have a sexual
or romantic relationship, how to keep it going, what
happens when it ends, what happens if you don't
want it, what happens if you really want it,
um, kind of how Approaches to relationships have changed
over time or across countries, across different cultural settings,
within different subgroups of the population. So, it's really
kind of anything that has to do with social
connection is the type of thing that we study.
Right. So let's go through some of the aspects
of the, I will call it dynamics between partners,
uh, and how that translates into health outcomes that
you've studied. So is there a link between having
an optimist partner and one's own health?
Yeah, there, there is. So that's, uh, a big
part of our research agenda is trying to see
how Different things about the person you're married to
or you're friends with, uh, can affect your health
and well-being, and, um, you know, optimism, which I,
you know, I'm guessing most listeners know, even if
they're not, and most people know what that means,
right? It's kind of looking forward to good things
that will happen or thinking good things will happen
in the future. Um, SO, among people and individuals
that is generally associated with, uh, good things. Um,
SO those people who say they're optimistic, live longer,
they're happier, um, they have better social relationships. But
then, you know, because we were interested in the
impact of people around you, you know, cause I
think everybody acknowledges that, um, you know, they don't
live in a vacuum, you know, they're, they're affected
by their family and their friends and their partners.
You know, we, we had this idea that maybe
optimism would be good for um your partner as
well. So, um, There's a bunch of different theories
for why that might be the case, uh, but
we sort of just jumped right in and tried
to see if there was, um, you know, any
link between it, and it turns out, over and
above you being an optimist. Um, BEING married to
an optimist is associated with better health, uh, better
mobility, so among older adults, you know, being able
to say, bend down and pick up a quarter,
that's like a, like a famous kind of ability
question. Um, YEAH, they live longer, they're more cognitively
intact, you know, it staves off Alzheimer's disease later
if you're married to someone who's optimistic, so, um,
the benefits are abound, you know, it looks like
it's affecting a bunch of different parts of a,
a person's life, and But then the mystery is
sort of, you know, why is that the case?
Uh, YOU know, I actually find super optimistic people
kind of annoying and maybe bad for my health.
Um, SO that's what we've been trying to do
lately is figure out, OK, well, like, why is
this good? When might it be bad? Um, AND
then what can we tell people if, say, they
want to be more optimistic, or, or they're trying
to find a partner for the first time. So
that's, that's kind of what we're after.
Yeah, and can you already tell us more about
that? I mean, when is having an optimist partner
something good, when is it something bad, and why
is there that link between having an optimist partner
and health and good health outcomes?
Yeah, so there's a bunch of different, um, Things
people think, uh, being merit to optimists might, you
know, help you out with. So, in one sense,
like the positive emotion is good, you know, being
surrounded by someone who's not in the dumps all
the time, or, you know, always, uh, you know,
just raining on your parade. If you tell them
the good news, well, it's like, well, aren't you
terrified of that new job, you know, aren't you,
don't you think they'll think you're dumb, or, you
know, it's, people wanna be affiliated with optimistic people.
Um, SO one is just the mobilizing energy that
some of those people have, but then, You know,
the theories I mentioned earlier, a lot of them
say that optimists think that they have control over
their lives, which for me it's always been this
really fascinating finding in literature where there's some people
who think that good things happen to them, will
happen to them, and then like, gosh darn it,
they, like they have a bunch of good things
happen to them. I always thought that that was
so bizarre, um. But then the truth is, like,
people who think that, think that their actions matter.
They think that going to the gym will benefit
their health. They think that, you know, changing their
diet or nutrition will help them. They think that,
you know, they go to the doctor, you know,
it might be nothing, but it's good to go.
Um, OR even if it is something, it's a
good thing that I went early and caught it
early. So, there's a type of mastery or control
that, um, optimists have about their lives. Sometimes it's
delusional, which I'll tell you about in a second.
Um. But then, you know, for, for the most
part, they basically try stuff, um, they don't give
up, they persevere. But then they're willing to like
try new things too, so they're pretty flexible. Um,
SO that, that's one thing is that when you
ask someone to exercise, like the optimist will be
like, oh yeah, that'd be good for me. I'll,
I'll, I'll do that. So, so most people think
it's like physical activity, um, stress reduction, so optimists
might be like less stressed out and stress is
bad for your health, obviously, um. So that's why
people think it works is like diet and exercise,
which, uh, you know, I wish I had a
better explanation, but those things are pretty, pretty good
for you, and um it turns out optimism might
motivate those. Um, BUT yeah, there's a whole another
literature on, um, Kind of, uh. Unrealistic optimism is
what they call it, or uh delusional optimism is
what they call it, and, you know, the truth
is it's all measured kind of differently than what
I just told you about. So the stuff that
I just told you about where optimism is great
and everything's amazing. A lot of that's just asking
you, hey, um, you'll agree with an item like,
I expect good things, more good things than bad
things in the future. That's just you being like,
yes or no, or on a little scale. The
unrealistic optimism people will often measure it, um, using
like a task of some sort, or, um, they'll
ask you about something that they have factual information
about, and then they'll kind of quantify how kind
of unrealistic you are. So, um, you know, one
thing that they might do is they might say,
um, what would you say is your percentage risk
for getting lung cancer. Um, AND they would give
a number, and then, so famously, people who smoke
tend to give a lower number than their actual
risk. Um, THEY basically think that they'll, they're less
likely to get it even though they smoke every
day. Um, SO there's actually a way in public
health and epidemiology to estimate like how, what is
your risk for lung cancer based on if you
smoke or not, or where you live, or other
risk factors. Um, SO what they'll do is they'll
just take the percentage you gave me, and they'll
subtract it from that kind of risk, that actual
risk. And then that's the degree in which you're
unrealistically optimistic, and then that's associated with a bunch
of bad things like you keep smoking, uh, you
do a bunch of other unhealthy things, you take
riskier bets. So there's like a little bit of
like, Not Wall Street research, but economic research where
you, you look at if people take risks, um.
Yeah, other things too, like they'll give students, they'll
say, well, how do you think you did on
that test you just took, and then they'll look
at how they've done on the test, and then
they'll subtract the two numbers, and um, if you're
more on the realistically optimistic, you're sadder after you
get the test score. So anyway, yeah, part of
it is baked into like how it's measured, um.
But then there's also this other part where optimism
is measured through these other means, um, and then
that's, it looks like optimism could be dangerous, you
know, like, Uh, you keep doing a really unhealthy
thing, or it's preventing you from doing a healthier
thing, or, um, you, you don't engage in self-insight
cause you think you're perfect. Um, SO there, there's,
there's other ways in which it can be really
harmful, and part of the intellectual fun is like
trying to figure out when and why that's the
case, and, um, how to abuse people of those
kind of optimistic delusions, and it turns out it's
actually really hard, you know, humans are pretty stubborn
about, about themselves.
Right. So I asked you about optimism. How about
happiness? Does happiness of the spouse also contribute to
one's own health?
Yeah, so we, yeah, that's another kind of, um,
area where we try to look at these things
that people seek out in life, like most people
want, would say that they would want to be
happy or most people would say they live longer
too. Um, AND again, we tried to figure out
like, what is it about people that, you know,
you could measure pretty easily, so how happy you
are or how optimistic you are. These are things
that psychologists at least think that they are good
at measuring. Um, SO yeah, so that, um, similar
to the to optimism, a lot of it is
kind of this positive energy, this sense of purpose
and meaning, that's some other research that we're doing
too. So there's this general outlook in life where,
you know, it's benefiting you and your partner, so,
it's associated with better health and well-being and lowered
mortality too. Um, PEOPLE think the pathway is like
a little bit different, so, um, they think that
maybe there's this driving force of happy people. Um,
BUT, you know, those studies in particular, it gets
to this really fascinating thing happening in the close
relationships field right now, where, um, you know, there's
some controversial research published a few years ago by
Samantha Joel. Where, uh, they modeled all these things
about you and all these things about your partner,
and they just tried to use all those things
through this kind of machine learning approach, um, to
predict like why you're happy or if you stay
together. And, you know, the really fascinating thing, and
this is why it's controversial, and it caused a
little bit of an existential crisis within me, but
basically, they found that a lot of what makes
you happy in your relationships has nothing to do
with your partner and has a lot to do
with you. Um, AND if you've ever like, been
in relationships, you can appreciate, like, if you're not
in a good mental space, it kind of colors
everything, like, uh, you know, you're, you're on edge,
you assume your partner doesn't have great intentions, um.
So that was really eye opening, you know, after
I thought about it, it's like, oh yeah, something
like mental health or people's attachment styles, which we'll
talk about later. Yeah, all that stuff does predict
like people's experiences, um. But so then when we
study things like happiness, a lot of it is
geared towards like finding out the source of people's
relationships, relationship woes, uh, and their happiness and their
joy, um, and part of that research is like
acknowledgement that, hey, like some of it has to
do with like everything that's inside your head, um,
but then even above that we're, we're finding some
partner stuff, but then it's this whole evolving kind
of Area of the field that I didn't think
would be evolving where we kind of have to
go back and look at like how partners are
influential. We, we think they are, it's just um
figuring out exactly when and, and why that's, that's
the challenge.
Mhm. So, let me ask you about the specific
health uh outcome or health issue. I would like
to ask you about sleep quality. Is there a
link between marital quality and sleep quality?
Yeah, there is, and, um, a lot of our
research was trying to figure out like what's the
more um kind of consequential um direction, causal direction,
so, um. You know, I think for years and
years and years there was a sentiment where, uh,
it's kind of an idiom, a cultural idiom. It's,
I never go to bed angry, uh, it's this
marital, it's this marital advice that people give, um,
they should give more advice, but that's like a
core feature is don't go to bed angry. Um,
SO, um, for years and years and years that
was meant to be like, well, you know. Um,
YOU know, be sensitive to kind of relationship dynamics,
try to settle an argument before you have kind
of, um, before you go unconscious and sleep. Um,
BUT, you know, a lot of our research was
to suggest, you know, maybe sleep quality affects close
relationships as well. So, if you have either too
little sleep or poor quality sleep, that, again, makes
you on edge, it makes you stressed out. It's
actually associated with a lot of really bad, um,
health problems too, cognitive problems as well. Um, SO
we found that that also extends to your close
relationships, um, But it's kind of an interesting question
to ask. Um, YOU know, a person's healthy overall
lifestyle would be, say, good sleep and having a
good relationship and stuff, but, um, there's a sense
in which when you think about how to improve
any of those things, well, maybe the one reason
why your sleep is screwed up is because you
fight with your partner, like all day and just
before you go to bed. And there's also a
sense that, you know, well, maybe the reason your
relationship isn't going well is because you are working
on 3 hours of sleep each night. Uh, AND,
you know, if you kind of did better sleep
hygiene, maybe like your marriage would improve, as controversial
as that kind of premise is, but there is
a sense in which these things are all baked
together. So, yeah, you know, we do more kind
of correlational stuff, so it's just like, you know,
people who have better sleep or they do have
better relationships over time, and it looks like they
do. Um, BUT there's been other people too that'll
look at more. What's called a daily diary approach
where they'll kind of ask them, hey, how'd you
sleep last night? And uh how much did you
fight with your partner today? And they'll do that
every day for a whole month, which I, sometimes
I think is a little torturous. But, um, but
yeah, so that, those studies have been done as
well. There's been physiological studies, kind of where they'll
measure your heart rate and um cortisol levels too.
So, um, yeah, it looks like, you know, sleep,
bad sleep is really bad for relationships. Um, And
also your health too. So, yeah, a lot of
it was trying to link those two things together
over time to, to communicate how important it is,
uh, to work on both of those things.
So before we move on to other topics, are
there any other ways partners can promote health?
Oh yeah, so many, so many. Uh, SO yeah,
we talked a little bit about, you know, exercise
and or thinking that you can achieve things, and
that's why you try, um, but there's a sense
in which, yeah, partners shape a lot of health
outcomes, so. Sometimes they do it in proactive ways,
so they'll say, hey, you should go to the
doctor, you know, it could, it might not be
as bad as you think, or, um, partners have
a vested interest in us surviving. They, they, we
get to keep being in their life if we're
alive. Um, BUT then also they have, you know,
warm, affectionate feelings, they care about us. Um, SO
sometimes they'll encourage health behaviors like that. Um, SOMETIMES,
um, Just by being in their sphere, if they
make a positive health change, we also tend to
make that change. So, there's been studies on, um,
when one partner quits, their other partner is likely
to quit in the next year. Um, SO, it,
it's promotive, like going to the doctor or maybe
going to the gym together. Um, BUT then it
can also be kind of more restrictive and controlling.
So, um, They might prevent us from doing a
bunch of things that are really unhealthy, so, uh,
they might say, hey, don't get dessert, don't eat
that whole chocolate cake. Um, I, it's a great
example when sometimes when spouses live together and one
goes out of town, and the spouse who stays
devolves into this primitive state where they eat nothing
but candy all weekend and lounge around the house,
and they don't get any chores done. There's, there's
actually entire theories about that in the relationship science,
where there is this kind of controlling aspect to
relationships where um they imbue us with more control,
we're accountable to another person. Um, THEY'RE influential in
our lives in the sense that they, they ask
us to, um, kind of do healthier things or
selfless things. So that's a bunch of reasons. Like
sometimes they prevent us from doing really bad stuff,
sometimes they promote really good stuff, um, and that's
generally why people think relationships are good for people,
um, you know, they also reduce stress too, but,
um. The idea is like they, they help us
make smarter decisions, so that's kind of the grand
theory is, uh, you know, partners motivate us to,
to do healthier things.
Mhm. Let me ask you now a little bit
about spousal bereavement. How do people react psychologically to
it?
Uh, SO my very, very short answer is that
it is a very devastating transition. Um, HOWEVER, um,
That might seem obvious to a lot of listeners,
but there's a bit of a controversy happening in
the field right now, actually, if you're curious, um,
so for years and years and years, OK, so
this will go back before the 1980s. I'll give
you a timeline as well. So before the 1980s,
a lot of people, uh, would look at, say,
friends in their life or, or relatives, um, and
you know, they would acknowledge that it's this really
devastating transition. But then there were some people who
um kind of, uh, had this absent grief, they
sometimes called it, where, you know, they would experience
this really devastating loss, but then they would, they
would kind of be OK, you know, they'd be
sad in the interim, but they would kind of
keep chugging along. Um, AND there was a little
bit of stigma to that, you know, I think
that as a society we have this normative expectation
of how people would be sad or respond if,
say, a partner died, um. And then, um, In,
I think like the 80s and 90s, there was
this really interesting data set out of Michigan. They
started this study, it's a little dark, um, but
they basically recruited couples with the knowledge that one
of the couple members would pass away in the
next, say, two or three years. So, um, it's
just a really interesting study where they set it
up knowing that a partner would be lost. Um.
But that study was hugely influential because it kind
of studied bereavement psychologically really in depth for the
first time. It's called the clock study, um, from
the University of Michigan. So, um, that study was
really beneficial because, um, this guy named George Bonanno
and other people. Uh, SHOWED that there were a
bunch of different trajectories that you could follow, um,
after you say, lose a spouse. So, like I
said, there are some people for whom it's really
devastating, like, it's awful, and then they don't recover.
Um, SO they also kept following these spouses. Um,
BUT then there was a more normative one where,
you know, you get, so, you know, you're, you
have relatively good psychological functioning, and then your partner
dies, and, um, it gets really, really bad, but
then you kind of rebound, uh, later. And I
think Um, it's a split between most people doing
that, and then most people being resilient, meaning that
they didn't really have a huge increase in depressive
symptoms. Um, SO I, I love that research and
it was really great. As someone who's interested in
personality, a lot of it was, um, showing the
heterogeneity or how, you know, how people change at
different rates or and adjust differently. And, you know,
it gave me this great appreciation for like humans,
that there's not just one way to grieve, there's
not, you know, just one way to, to navigate
these terrible things that happen to us. OK. So
that was like a really great and heartwarming story.
The problem is, in the last, say, 10 or
15 years, um, people have tried to kind of
come up with different ways of modeling, uh, kind
of how people change before and after bad stuff
happens to them. And one thing that they'll do,
and I, I'll try to avoid getting too nerdy
and uh bored and bog it down by like
really technical things, but basically that, that original research
in the eighties and nineties, um They applied a
technique called uh latent class analysis or growth mixture
modeling. There's a few different names for it. Um,
IT'S basically saying, You know, we want, and we're
interested in how people change over time, but maybe
like within that sample, there's a bunch of different
like subpopulations where some people increase and some people
go down. The heartwarming thing I told you earlier
that there's these kind of ways that people change.
So, when you do something like that, you make
a few methodological assumptions, um. And, uh, basically, in
the last, I think it's like 10 years or
plus or so, a few people have said, you
know, if you relax those basic assumptions, um, the
results change really dramatically. Um, SO instead of there
being like a huge group of people that like
aren't resilient. The truth is that actually a lot
of people struggle way more than you think, and
actually some people never recover, and it's way, way
worse than you thought, basically, like more, like more
people kind of go the bad route. They're in
the bad place or bad route. Um, SO that's
where we stand now is there's kind of a
disagreement over how exactly to model it. Um, TO
pull the curtain back briefly, a lot of it
is making assumptions on Between those different groups of
people and how they change differently, like, Um, within
one of those groups, do you allow some of
those people to be more depressed than others, um,
or, you know, do you think the groups would
change differently in different ways, not just going up
or down, or, uh, just up or just down.
Um, AND basically when you relax those and you
kind of allow for more freedom in the data,
um, then actually the, the picture gets more devastating.
So, you know, one thing that our research has
Kind of shown is that people are really, really
stable. Um, THEY don't change very much. Uh, IF
you've lived your whole life being depressed and then
something bad happens to you, you, you're likely gonna
be depressed after it. Um, And you know, that's
something I think we can all appreciate, but, um,
it's, it actually is really, really important for the
analysis, uh, to account for that. So, um, yeah,
I, I think it changes some things like it'll
make you more depressed, it'll lower your well-being. Uh,
YOU know, a few papers we have show that
it won't fundamentally change who you are. Um, AND
there's some controversy about that too, cause there's a
group of researchers who think that When your partner
dies, um, it provides this really great opportunity to
radically transform yourself, which is true, um, you know,
it's a big decision, but Uh, we find that
most people don't do that, um, and that's kind
of our contribution is to show like what changes,
what doesn't change, how is that kind of the
same based on how you analyze the data. So,
um, but yeah, it, it's such an important life
event. It's a transformative life event, but, um, You
know, sometimes things change, sometimes they don't, but yeah,
the question is kind of what, how, how would
it spur changes? Does it spur changes? Um, THERE'S
so many different things that could potentially affect in,
in your life. Mhm.
And uh can cognitive decline impact spouses loneliness?
Yeah, yeah, so again, that's another kind of series
of studies we, where we're looking at the impact
of health and, and relationships. That, that particular paper
is super interesting cause we Um, it started at
this, um, data immersion experience where they basically, it's
really interesting, they give you a data set on
the first day and then you have to analyze
it and kind of come up with a question
and Come up with the question then analyze it,
um, and that one was born out of personal
experiences, so, you know, we sat as a group
talking about how Alzheimer's disease affects families and partners
and marriages, um, And one thing that someone said,
and it was really poignant at the time was
that You know, even though someone is physically still
there when These cognitive declines happen, um, it's, it
almost feels like you're losing somebody. Uh, AND we,
we all, like, the room was just kind of
silent cause it was, it's one of those things
that like, really speaks to our humanity and like,
I, it kind of gave me goosebumps because it,
it's like, it was such a shared experience where
it's like, yeah, we spent our whole lives with
these people or long periods of time with these
people, and then You know, the degree, you know,
they're just gone, the way, the way we used
to remember them. Um, THE relationship just changes, um,
you know, people, people become caregivers instead of like
spouses and lovers and Um, you know, so in
a way, one thing we found was that we
had some data on people in marriages before, before
they got dementia, basically, before it was diagnosed, uh,
or before their cognition got so bad that it
was Alzheimer's disease. Um, AND when we found that,
you know, even like 8 years out before they
get the formal diagnosis, um, their spouses reported feeling
lonelier and lonelier as the dementia diagnosis got closer,
so. Um, uh, SO it's, it's a weird way
to kind of approach research where it started by
saying, hey, here's this weird shared experience we have,
and then, hey, can we look at these data
with, you know, thousands of couples and hundreds of
couples filed over time. Um, AND what we found
is that like the road to get to this
really terrible thing was also really terrible. So basically,
kind of people felt Again, before they got so
bad, they, they were kind of feeling like they
were losing their partner, um, to this disease, so,
um, You know, the next steps in that research
is to figure out, you know, maybe. There are
ways of managing cognitive decline better, um, you know,
maybe there's other relationships in your life that could
buoy, um, you know, your social connection, um, but
I acknowledge it's also really challenging when you're caring
for somebody who really struggles with, um, things like
cognitive decline and dementia. So, yeah, it looks like
they're at, they're at risk for, yeah, being really,
really lonely even before, um, the actual diagnosis happens.
So we've been talking a lot about people in
relationships. What about single people? What is the relationship
between singlehood and life satisfaction? When are single people
satisfied?
Yeah, enough about the married people, right? There's single
people. I know the truth is it's such a
huge part of the population, and, you know, everybody
spends some part of their life single, so, um.
Yeah, I think I'm, I'm part of a, a
few different kind of researchers around the country and
around the world where You know, I think, um,
there has been previous research, um, this person named
Bella De Paulo did a lot of work on
this, and there's a sense with, with more and
more people being single, um. Does it make sense
to kind of study them in their own right,
like, what their experiences are, what makes them happy,
um, does the absence of a relationship make them
happy? Um, SO, yeah, so in terms of kind
of Um, You know, the single being single or
partnered, um, I will say that is, uh, that's
also complicated. Sorry to ruin everything with, uh, some,
some nerdy methodological point, but, um. You know, if
you look at overall, like across all studies all
around the world, people who are in relationships say
that they're happier and have higher life satisfaction. Um,
BUT there's a few caveats. So, uh, one is
that we don't know if marriage is making people
happy. Um, SO I think that for a lot
of people when they hear that, that married people
are happier than single people, they think that like
marriage did that, uh, that's why they're different, and
single people aren't happy cause they're not in a
relationship. But, um, I'll tell you a few kind
of things to keep in mind. So one is
that, um, similar to the bereavement study where kind
of, or the cognitive decline study where we have
data before they get, getting a dementia, um, people
have done studies like that before people get married,
um, so they'll look at things like how happy
you were before you got married, how happy you
were the, the day or the year you got
married, and then do you keep being happy later
on. Um, SO one thing that they find is
that the people who are married are happier to
begin with. Uh, THEY'RE happier before they're, they even
started dating. Um, SO when you hear like, married
people are happier than single people, um, it's true
in a sense, like when you just compare them,
but it's also a little misleading in the sense
that it's not cause of marriage per se, it's
just cause of like, their whole life experience before
that, and You know, happy people are more positive,
maybe they um have better like social functioning, like
they just kind of navigate social relationships a little
bit easier, and maybe that's why they get married.
It's not that, you know, marriage has this magical
properties. OK, so, that's me complaining about marriage briefly.
Um, AND then there's this other, uh, stuff too,
where, um, just because single people don't have a
relationship. Uh, DOESN'T mean that they're miserable. So, and
that's like, it's sometimes a little insulting to suggest
that, like, oh, you're not married by the time
you're 19. What, you know, what will you ever
find meaning in your life? Oh, there's nothing to
do, there's no one to be friends with, there's
no professional successes that you would ever kind of
endeavor or pursue, and, um, you know, the truth
is that single people have stuff in their life,
you know, they have friends, they have hobbies, and
Uh, you know, professional circumstances, and then, of course,
not all married people are happy, right? Like I
know a lot of married friends that are like
kind of miserable, not with their marriage per se,
but like their lives. So, yeah, um, that brings
me to my second point where, um, the effect
is always not as large as you think. Um,
SO if listeners implicitly, if not explicitly say, oh,
I'd be so much happier if I was like
married or in a relationship. Like that might not
always be the case, you know, it, it wouldn't
solve every life problem you have, obviously. Like it
would check this box, but it would maybe leave
other things in your life unchecked. So, um, you
know, when friends tell me, like, you know, they
feel like this is a missing piece in their
life that'll kind of like fill this hole and
make them happy in every way, you know, for
some people that might be true, but, um, When,
again, they look at these studies comparing like, as
people get married, and then, you know, as people
don't get married and as they kind of switch
from divorce to singlehood, you know, a lot of
people do experience life satisfaction changes, but um, Yeah,
it's, it's not as big as people think. There
are, you know, some robust effects, but then, We're
working on something now, and, um, you know, Jeff
McDonald's also published something on this recently where, um,
Marriage, it looks like is associated with life satisfaction,
but then it's sometimes not in some countries, and
then in some countries, it's the opposite direction where
single people are happier. Um, SO all that's to
say is, you know, marriage is this kind of
normative thing that people aim for, but then, Like
I, I don't think it's like the sole determinant,
and this wasn't what you're asking. It's not really
the sole determinant and what makes people happy, um,
so I think people put it on a pedestal
a bit as this kind of thing that we
all have to reach for, but then, um, The
sad thing is I think they'd be disappointed if,
if they think that that's gonna solve all their
problems. So, um, single people are happier, um, you
know, when they're investing in friendships and kind of
seeking out goals, and, um, it intersects a little
bit with how Um, how they age and develop
too, so kind of if they kind of become
content with being single too, so, um, yeah, it's
a super, super complicated answer to a, to a
simple question, but it, it's some, it's something that's
really hot in the field right now is figuring
out kind of what makes people happy and is
it a relationship and like for some people the
answer is no.
OK, but compared to singlehood, does marriage link with
higher well-being and life satisfaction, or not?
Yeah, I think, I think on average, um, but
then it, it varies a little bit, like, based
on, like, who you're studying and where they live,
and there are other life circumstances too. So, yeah,
the answer is yes, but then, you know, if
a friend came up to you and said, like,
should I get married, um, And like I, I
would say that like the answer kind of would
depend on a bunch of other things, not just,
so I wouldn't just say yes to them.
Right. And how do consistently married people compare to
people who have moved in and out of various
relationships throughout life when it comes to wellbeing?
Yeah, so there's, that illustrates another way to look
at this too, basically. If you followed people over
their whole life and looked at, you know, when
they were single, when they got married, divorced, and
then you just basically look at how happy they
are at the end of life, um, that's a
different thing rather than comparing, say, how happy your
friend is before and after they get married. Um,
SO, yeah, so that, that's kind of stuff we've
done where, again, we followed like thousands of people
and look at it as they get in and
out of relationships and You know, we'll, we'll find
people who, yeah, like you said, are consistently in
a relationship. Where they find, they're the lucky ones
that find someone when they're really young, and then
they just kind of stay married. Um, AND then
you'll see people that kind of move in and
out of relationships too, where they'll, you know, they'll
be married for 10 years, they'll get divorced, they'll
stay single. Um, AND it looks like those people
who are consistently married are the happier ones, um,
and the people who move in and out, and,
you know, they get divorced or they date for
a bit and then they break up, they sort
of look like single people actually, kind of over
the whole lifespan. Um, SO, you know, they seem
to be just as happy than people who like
never had a relationship over 6 months. So, it,
you know, it's really interesting, um. The paper is
called Love and Lost, uh, you know, this Shakes,
I think it's Shakespearean, is it, is it better
to have loved and lost than never loved at
all, and most people say yes, but then, um,
we have this really weird study where, you know,
the people who kind of migrated in and out
of relationships, they, they aren't really happier at the
end of the day. Maybe Shakespeare wasn't thinking of
happiness per se, but, um, Yeah, it's, the really
cool thing with that is more and more longitudinal
studies are doing that. So, one thing we're hoping
to do in the future is to look at,
you know, maybe those disparities between single people and
those who are married their whole life or those
who move in and out, you know, is that
similar across different countries and different settings, and, you
know, is there some sort of ecological or, you
know, something about your environment that's explaining why. Why
you're not as happy as you are, uh, as
you transition and out, so, yeah, it looks like
the people who kind of have their found their
person and stay with them. They tend to be
happier, but like I said earlier, like they could
have been happier, you know, to begin with, so,
um, but part of it is discovering like how
much is that the case.
How about personality similarity? Does it also play a
role in relationship satisfaction?
Yeah, so, um, that's another kind of area of
our research where, um, We kind of, uh, and
other people have done this work too, just we,
we violated a lot of people's intuition by showing
that it kind of doesn't, um. And, you know,
it really, really confuses people, uh, cause I think
when people have a list of the things that
they kind of want in a partner. One of
the things that they say they want is someone
who like vibes well or is similar to them,
um, you know, and, and on paper, it makes
a lot of sense. Like, if you say, Uh
Or a shy person paired with an extrovert, or
if you're someone who's like a picky eater, paired
with someone who's like really adventurous, like there's a
ton of ways that can go wrong if you're
not similar. Um, BUT, and some similarity does matter,
so something on like say religious background, that's actually
really, really important. So, it's kind of, uh, if
you have if you want kids or not, that's
another really, really important one. SO some similarity matters
in that case. Uh, THERE'S also some racial ethnic,
uh, similarities, so, Where people are kind of attracted
to those who are kind of part of their
own racial ethnic group. Um, BUT in terms of
personality similarity, I think people will often privilege that
as a thing that's super important, like, we're just
really similar, we kind of go together, um. But
I think the So tons of people have studied
this, and they all kind of find that it
doesn't matter as much, so we've thrown so much
data at it, there's been so many studies on
it, and it kind of always comes back not
being super important, um, but the really interesting thing
is that That might not matter like how extroverted
you are and how extroverted a partner is, um,
but what does matter is if you think you're
similar, uh, and then that, so that's the tricky
thing where regardless if you are similar or not,
um. That kind of doesn't matter, but if you've
convinced yourself you are, if you perceive that there
is more similarity, that's associated with a bunch of
good things. So you, you say you're happier, you
know, you say you work well together, you fight
less, um. Uh, YOU'RE more attracted to people when
you first meet them, if you think that you're
similar, even again, if you're not. So again, like,
one of the really Big contributors for um kind
of relationship sciences. That a lot of the things
you think will make you happy in your life,
or happy in your relationships, like, aren't always the
case, but then there's maybe these other things that
you would neglect, um, that could, could be really
important, um, and that's true of a lot of
things like, The things that you say you want
in relationships, and then what actually predicts you getting
in relationships are different. Um, Yeah, you thinking something
is more important than it actually being true. Um,
THERE'S a lot of things in life that are
sort of like that too, but, um, but yeah,
I think, yeah, one thing is we, we've looked
at so many different data sets and different ways
of analyzing it, and it looks like it kind
of just doesn't matter as much as people think.
Um, THE, the, the more controversial one, which we
don't have to go into is that, um, the
idea that similar people go together is the premise
of every Um, online and mobile dating application that
people currently use, uh, and I'm telling you that
it's unequivocally maybe not important, so, uh, that's the
kind of controversial part.
That's interesting. So let's get into the topic of
attachment then. You've done lots of work on it.
First of all, what is attachment theory and what
are the different kinds of attachment style out there?
So yeah, it's, it's basically a theory describing how
your early caregiving relationships, like your relationships with your
parents, might, uh, put you on a trajectory that
would explain why you approach relationships in all sorts
of different ways. Uh, SOME people say you internalize
what relationships are like based on these early experiences,
um, and that guides say how you make friends
and who you date and how you behave in
relationships. Uh, SOME people would say the rest of
your life. So that's kind of the basic premise,
that basic fact, that basic premise, um, or theory
most people would agree on. Um, EXACTLY how to
measure it, and then if it's the same across
life, it's something we can talk about, cause there's
a lot of kind of people talking about that.
Um, BUT, you know, early relationships, um, are often
categorized in a few different ways. So, some of
this research observed out of like John Bowlby observing,
um, basically like foster children, um, and, uh, Yeah,
um, but it's, it was later operationalized in a
series of different studies. Uh, SO Bobi would have
these kind of observations at a Tavistock clinic where
You know, he would notice that children separated from
their parents act in particular ways. Um, BUT then,
yeah, Mary Ainsworth was really, really use useful and
innovative and developing the first way we can test
some of these things. So she came up with
the strange situation paradigm, which maybe some people will
know, but it's this kind of task where you
um bring in um parents and their children, and
then the parent leaves the room, and you basically
study how the child reacts when the parent leaves,
and then when the parent comes back. So, from
that basic design, they'll say that children might be,
say, securely attached, um, have an anxious, ambivalent attachment,
a dismissing avoidant attachment. Um, BUT then the really
tricky thing. Um, AND the thing that we're interested
in is sort of what happens when people transition
from those early childhood years to start forming, say,
friendships and romantic relationships, um, and that's where it
gets a little hairy.
So, uh, just to refer to something you mentioned
there, is attachment the same across life or not?
Um. Yes, uh, so, um, sort of, um, but
not entirely. So, so one thing is that your
relationships are just very different across your life. So,
like we've been talking about parent-child relationships, it's really
asymmetrical, um, for, for a few years early in
life they controlled when you ate, when you slept,
uh, maybe not if you screamed or not, or
if you threw a tantrum, maybe they didn't control
that stuff, but, um. Uh, BUT then, you know,
as you approach adolescence, and like, you start to
become more autonomous and more independent. Um, YOU start
kind of forming relationships with different people, so all
of a sudden you meet a friend or a
peer, and that's really different than your relationship with
your parents, right? There's this reciprocity, uh, they're an
equal, you know, they're often of equal stature. Um,
LIKEWISE, you then start dating, and then that's yet
a different one. It's sort of like peer relationships
where it's someone. Usually of equal standing or someone
your age or your generation, um, not always, but,
um, and there's a sense in which, yeah, there's
like an emotional and physical intimacy with that relationship,
that is maybe not as present with friends. So
that's been part of the difficulty too is moving
attachment from this more kind of caregiver child asymmetric
asymmetrical thing to more autonomous relationships that say you
would seek out like today as an adult. Um,
AND the measure is different too, so we can't
put like a 40 year old man in the
strange situation paradigm, it just wouldn't work. Like their
mom leaves and they don't start crying, and they
don't, you know, have this exuberant thing, you know,
they're They can control their emotions, and they have
other relationships. Um, SO what they'll do is, uh,
instead of this strange situation, some people will do
a very long interview, where they'll talk, have people
talk about their early experiences and So they'll basically
see if you can talk about them in a
coherent way that makes sense, even if it's not
always positive, the idea that you kind of have
a realistic assessment of what your childhood is like,
and There's ways that they kind of suss out
if you're kind of being authentic with with those
discussions. And then other, a whole different group of
people who I'm a part of, uh, will give
people self-report scales, where again, they'll give them a
series of statements for how they approach um adult
relationships, um, and they'll kind of agree or disagree
with that, and those are way easier to fill
out than say a really long interview. Um, THE
problem is that the interview and the self-report questions
don't correlate very highly. Um, SO again, they start
out with the same theory, again, that caregiving relationships
really matter, um, but then they came up with
different ways of measuring it and The hope is
that they would kind of agree a little bit,
but it turns out that they, they kind of
don't, um, so that's where kind of the field
starts to bifurcate. Um, THERE'S other relationships as well,
like, I give you the first part of the
story and then you finish it, and if you
finish it in a really insecure way, uh, you
know, they don't, they, the two don't, don't end
up together and whatever they fight at the end
of it or it's a big falling out, um,
so, um. That's when the field starts to bifurcate,
and then there's these two different traditions. Um, AND
then from there, there's a million different questions because
adult relationships are so complicated, like, you know, you
have partners and friends, you have relatives, you, a
lot of people still maintain relationships with their parents,
and, but those relationships change too. Um, SO part
of the challenge with attachment is grappling with You
know, you have all these different relationships in your
life. Uh, IS it the same thing? I think
there's a kernel of the same thing where there's
some stability throughout your whole life with how you
approach, how you approach relationships, but, um, exactly how
to test that and how strong it is, um,
is a different story entirely. So I think it's
like, The effects are probably small, but still there.
Um, BUT if you, if you talk to say
internet influencers or self-proclaimed therapists, they'll claim that like
your childhood attachment. Dictates like 100% everything you do
all the time as an adult, and I, I
just don't think that that's true.
OK, so about that, do people have one single
kind of attachment style for every kind of relationship
and for relationships with all people, or can the
relationships, uh, can the attachment style vary from one
relationship to the other?
Yeah, um, and I think that that was also
a good thing that the field did was they,
they realized, you know, people who study childhood attachment,
there often is just this relationship with you and
your parents. Uh, OF course, you then, you know,
you have play dates with other really young children
too, and you have aunts and uncles, whatever, and
siblings, um. Um, BUT then, you know, I think
there's this acknowledgement that You know, people aren't the
same in every relationship. They're not even the same
in, in, in every romantic relationship, I'll say, like,
your dynamics with, say, an ex-partner are different than
maybe your current and maybe different than a future
one. SO it started out with that, the idea
that people might have different kind of attachment styles
even within them, perhaps. Um, AND then we finally
started to measure those other relationships, so, um, You
know, there's some really influential measures about how you
interact with friends versus partners, and then versus your
parents, versus your siblings. And it was really, really
important to do that because it turns out that
they do matter, um, kind of for different things.
So, you know, we're primarily interested in how these
things change over time, and it looks like the
way that your relationships with your parents change are
different. With how you change with your friends and
romantic partners. So, um, That's a good illustration to
show that, hey, like you're not just defined by
this one trait or this one attachment style. Rather,
you know, you could approach relationships really, really differently,
where you could have a wonderful relationship with your
parents, but then really struggle with romance or vice
versa, where you date really well, but don't love
your parents as much. Um, SO yeah, so the,
the key though is when you measure something like
attachment style, what are you measuring? So are you
measuring like all of those different attachment styles just
like average together, or are some of the attachment
relationships more influential where, you know, by the time
you're say 40, maybe it matters more for your
romantic relationship, uh, but maybe like when you're 15,
it'll matter more for your parents or your, your
friends, you know, before or as you start dating.
So it, it's gotten more complicated, but I also
think it's gotten more. Kind of close to people's
actual experiences, uh, the idea that Yeah, there's, there's
some attachment styles that are partner specific and not
just this general approach. So, yeah, you, you tap
into a really interesting thing cause it was something
that people took a while to get to, but
then now it's sort of widely acknowledged that we
have different attachment styles to different people.
Mhm. And how does attachment change with age? Are
there any patterns in how attachments change as we,
uh, grow older?
Yeah, so this is, uh, one thing that our
lab tries to do, um, and work on really,
really deliberately. So, um, it does change across life,
so, um, and hopefully that'll give some hope to
listeners if they feel like they want to change,
um. Yeah, if they want to, uh, at least,
um. So, yeah, so we've done a bunch of
different studies on this. So sometimes we just look
at like a really, really big sample of people
and just compare young, middle aged, and older adults.
Um, AND sometimes we do that, but if they
live in different regions of the world, um, And,
you know, and the studies will have like 80
or 90,000 people, um, so like pretty big studies,
um, and you know, one thing we find is
that, um, across all those studies, people get less
anxious about relationships. So, um, and I've always found
that to be comforting, uh, so cause when I
was younger I was kind of anxious, especially about
relationships, um. But there's kind of this mellowing out
that happens where you kind of get less anxious.
Single people mellow out too, uh, so it's not
just people in relationships, um, so everybody kind of
just gets less anxious. They get less anxious about
non-relationship stuff too. So that's why I say it's
hopeful, you know, you can worry less about all
sorts of things. Um, It's also good that like
people in relationships, after they've been married for like
30 years, they stop worrying about if their partner
is gonna be around all the time, cause they
have this like evidence that's built up that, oh,
I'm gonna wake up next to them the next
day. OK, just like every other day, previous 29
years. Um. So, yeah, so it looks like people
uh Um, decrease in what's called attachment anxiety, which
is kind of worrying and preoccupied, being preoccupied about
relationships. Um, ATTACHMENT avoidance is a little bit different,
and some things are seen, some different things are
seen across different studies, so, If you just look
on average, the whole population, it looks like attachment
is weirdly just uh stable through a lot of
life. It's just this like flat line, um, Where
it just on, on the surface, it just doesn't
look like people are changing. Um, THE truth is
that kind of hides what a lot of people
are doing. So, the truth is that some people
are increasing and some people are decreasing, but then
when you average it out, it, um, just looks
like no one changes. So it's, it's really, really
misleading when you look at just an overall graph.
Um, THAT'S what people call individual differences and change.
They just individuals differ in their changes, that's all
that means, um. And uh one thing we have
found in recent studies is when you look at
the eldest old, like people who are, have surpassed
their 70s, 80s, into their 90s, some samples have,
um, for those people, avoidance tends to decline really
dramatically, um, so, It looks like, again, on average,
Like people are doing all sorts of crazy stuff,
going up, going down, but on average it's kind
of straight, and then in late life, it, it
declines a bit and I've, I find that one,
it's wonderful that you become less anxious, but I
often focus on that. Because there's a bunch of
theories about what happens um as you get older
and as you think that you might not live
forever and that you're gonna die soon, um. And
there's, there's theories about like, oh, when that happens.
You tend to prioritize stuff that gives your life
meaning and positive motion, and it turns out that
one of the primary things is that close relationships
provide us with that stuff, a sense of meaning,
a sense of structure, um. Now, there's been challenges
to that theory as well, uh, you know, they
say not everybody has that experience. It depends a
little bit on your, what you lived your whole
life, what your older adult years look like, like
how sick you are. Um, BUT there's a sense
in which, towards the end of life, people really
prioritize kind of the emotional meaning that close relationships
give. And avoidance often interferes with that. So what
we see at this general level is that people
decline, uh, when they get really, really old, uh,
in their avoidance, despite on average it looking like
they never change. Um, IT looks like people change
more for this, uh, kind of later in life.
Most people change a lot in younger adulthood, it's
the time at which people change the most actually,
across all personality traits. If you're younger, that's, that's
when you're changing, um. But then you see this
weird, maybe underappreciated thing where people keep changing, uh,
as they get later into life. So that that's
a very long story. So people mostly mellow out,
they get less anxious. And then avoidance, it looks
like doesn't change as dramatically, but then maybe when
people get older, they become more secure in that
regard, they become a little less avoidant.
You mentioned attachment and anxiety there, can it lead
to memory errors, and if so, how would that
impact relationships?
Yeah, so that's one of the reasons why attachment
or anxiously attached people sometimes struggle with relationships. They,
they do some things that, Um, also kind of
compromise their relationships, but we've, we tend to focus
on how they make meaning about relationships and how
they remember things, um, so yeah, there's a, that,
that research in particular was inspired by a few
different things. So one was, um, These two studies,
one was by Burke Feeney and the other was
by Jeff Simpson and a few other people where
In both studies, it, it was sort of similar
where they would have people fight, uh, or argue
about something. It's really sadistic. Relationship researchers say, what
are the things you fight about? AND then they'll
ask you to fight about them. It's really sad.
Um, SO what they'll do is they, they'll have
them fight and then they'll argue. Discuss a problem.
And uh then they'll ask, hey, how bad was
that, how negative was that? How much do you
like your partner right now? Um, AND then they
do this amazing thing where they'll basically just wait
a month, and then they'll ask them again, and
then they'll wait, wait another month and they'll ask
them again, again about the same thing. And what
they find is that uh anxiously attached people remember
the interaction as being worse than it actually was.
Um, SO again, like, we had your ratings when
the fight happened. We know how upset you were,
we know how angry you were and how awful
you thought it was. And over time, anxious people
just remember it being much and much worse, like
the more you ask them. Um, SO we, we
think that like, so the theory is that Anxious
people interpret. And like reconsolidate memories in a way
that fits with what they think about the world.
So if they think that their partner is a
jerk or unreliable or not in sync with them,
over time, like their cognitive biases will kind of
structure that, uh, accordingly. And then so that's, that's
where we kind of came in and We wanted
to know like exactly when these kind of memory
processes are introduced. Um, SO we've done these studies
too, where we'll just show people, um, Kind of
relationship content like someone talking about a breakup, um,
and, uh, then we'll say only show them, uh,
or only provide them the audio, so they're like
listening to a story, or sometimes it's like a
YouTube video where they'll watch the whole thing and
hear it, um, and we find that, yeah, like
anxious people embellish stuff that didn't happen, so, you
know, they'll listen to the story. And then we'll
say, hey, um, Here's a checklist of stuff that
happened in in the story. So the story might
be something as simple as like, I broke up
with my partner cause they were a jerk, uh,
they never listened to me, and we would say,
ask the anxious person like, oh, did they break
up? Yes or no? And they would say yes,
and then, uh, did they break up because they
thought they were a jerk, and the anxious person
would be like, yes. Uh, AND then we'd be
like, did they break up because one person cheated
on the other, and anxious people would be like,
yes, even though I didn't tell you that, right?
That wasn't part of the story. Um, SO, but,
you know, that stuff, that stuff is really interesting
because In those studies, we found that it only
really affected people when they saw the video, not
when they were just listening to it. Um, AND
it's this really, really fascinating, um, work where anxious
people get really overloaded by sensory input, especially about
relationships. So there's something about like watching someone tell
a story about a relationship and attending to their
facial expressions, or if they smile or frown or
if they're crying. That that leads kind of anxious
people to embellish stories or add things that didn't
didn't happen. Um, SO yeah, it, it turns out
that it looks like they can imbue stories with
false memories. Some people also selectively forget things, so
there's some work that avoiding people, um, We'll forget
relationship words, but not like other non-relationship words, like
they have this bias where it's not encoding it
or retrieving it. Um, BUT it's part of this
really, really exciting corner of our research where we
look at how kind of relationships shape your memories.
So, we even have some stuff where we have
people reporting on, um, really adverse childhood circumstances, like
if they, um, You know, parents would yell at
them, or spank them, or kind of even hit
them. And we did this really interesting study where
we asked people a bunch of times about their
early relationships, and it turns out their memories of
those things changed. Uh, AND it usually changed as
a function of stuff that was happening to them.
So like, If your relationships with your parents improve,
you kind of selectively remember fewer times in which
they were mean to you in the past. And
of course, the past is set in stone, it
doesn't change. Um, JUST like when we show people
these videos, the content doesn't change, but kind of
how you remember it, how you make sense of
it, um, does change, and it maybe depends on
stuff that you're thinking about. And that, that's something
that's consistent across all sorts of things. So, if
you remember A really tough part of your life.
There's a way in which you might not be
remembering it super objectively, right? Like, um, you know,
one famous thing is that we kind of minimize
how much we were responsible for bad stuff that
happens, um, you know, we're the hero in our
own stories sometimes, and, um. We see that with
relationships too, especially with stuff that you think wouldn't
change, like you remembering stuff about your childhood, um,
but it's way more variable than people appreciate, so,
um, you know, that's why the memory stuff is
so fascinating. So people will Add stuff that didn't
happen, remember stuff is worse than it was, or
like, They might tell you your childhood was worse
or happier than it actually was, and that answer
might change from month to month. So, um, you
know, there's some stable components like, like I grew
up in Chicago, like that's something that I could
tell you and I'll likely remember and doesn't change,
but You know, then we have these other things
where people will perceive and reflect on relationships in
really fascinating ways, and that's one thing why I'm
just so excited about relationship science. It's, you know,
a lot of it is other people matter in
our lives, and they're hugely influential, but sometimes they're
not as influential in the ways you think. And
then even if they are influential and supportive, maybe
you don't remember that perfectly, um, and maybe it's
not as influencing you in the ways that you
think, and, um, Relationships are so like befuddling and
fascinating to me, and um Yeah, I mean, it's
been really, really fun talking to you about it
because there's so many different moving components, um, and
yeah, I'm, I'm just obsessed with it. I, I
really love doing it and that's, yeah, there's so
many fun things about people and their relationships.
Great. So let me just ask you one last
question then. DOES attachment style influence relationship satisfaction, and
if so, in what ways?
Yeah, I, I think so. So, again, there's been
a lot of studies where that'll just correlate the
two, and they'll find that anxious and avoidant people
are less satisfied. Um, BUT then there's a, there's
a few different reasons why it does predict it
over time. So yeah, it does kind of shape
how people experience relationship satisfaction. You know, some is
that, you know, anxious people really really worry, really
worry about if partners will be available, and that's
usually not a good recipe if you don't think
your partner is kind of a reliable rock. Um,
AND then avoidant people are really uncomfortable with emotional
and physical in empathy. Um, SO, even when they
find themselves in relationships, they might not be super
happy with their lives, um. But again, like, if
you're, you know, emotionally distant, uh, don't kind of
engage in kind of the more intimate aspects of
relationships, if you're not super lovey-dovey, you know, there's
a sense in which you might not find it
super enjoyable when a partner is that way. Um,
SO it's, you know, it's interesting, there, there are
certain relationships that work for anxious and avoidant people,
um, you know, sometimes it works for them. Sometimes
it changes them to be more secure, and then
that relationship works for them, you know, it makes
them a little bit more receptive to the type
of relationship they're in. Um, YEAH, so there's a
sense in which like it does shape how we
experience relationships, but then a lot of our work
is how relationships shape how we view them and
how our personality. So, but there is a sense
in which we think it's bidirectional where, yeah, it
shapes your experience, but then there are maybe some
things your partner's doing that Might make you think
differently about the world, or think differently about relationships.
Um, AND it's really, really challenging to do. You
need, like, really long-term data, you sometimes need people
across multiple relationships, which is really hard. Um, BUT
we view it as really important cause I think
some people will, or we've actually asked people if
they wanted to change the relationships, if they want
to become more securely attached. And it's something that
people say that they want, um, And then the,
the big question moving forward is like, how do
we achieve that? How do we give people actual
things? What do we tell their partner to do
or not do to kind of help transform them?
Um, AND we don't have a really great solution
right now, but we're working on it.
Great. So, Doctor Chopik, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
your work on the internet?
Yeah, for sure. So, uh, yeah, I work at
Michigan State University. We have a lab website called
the Chopic Lab.com. Really humble, really not egotistical at
all. It's Chopiclab.com. And, uh, you'll be able to
see the stuff we're working on, uh, paper, a
copy of the papers we published, and then also
learn a lot about kind of what the students
and mentees are working on as well. So. Yeah,
I encourage people to check that out, and yeah,
it's really great talking with you.
Yeah, really fun talking with you. Thank you so
much for taking the time to come on the
show. Yeah, thanks so much. Hi guys, thank you
for watching this interview until the end. If you
liked it, please share it, leave a like and
hit the subscription button. The show is brought to
you by Enlights Learning and Development done differently. Check
their website at enlights.com and also please consider supporting
the show on Patreon or PayPal. I would also
like to give a huge thank you to my
main patrons and PayPal supporters, Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller,
Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf, Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew
Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis, Eric Elena, John Connors,
Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri Robert Windegerru Inai Zu
Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor, Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea,
Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan
Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith,
John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla
Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani,
Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison,
Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John
Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry,
Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pancortezus Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim
Duffy, Sony Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson,
Peter Wolozin, David Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists,
Larry D. Lee Jr. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey,
then Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul,
Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan,
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per
Crawley, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR,
Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos
Necht. A special thanks to my producers Iar Webb,
Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon,
Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John
Carlomon Negro, Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you for all.